Timothy P. Moran
Patient H&P #14
CC: Bilateral knee pain
HPI:
The patient is a 24 yo African-American man with h/o sickle cell disease who presented to the
ED with a 2 day h/o bilateral knee pain. The pain began Thursday morning at approx 4:00 am
while the patient was working the night shift at a department store. The pain was described as
aching and had a gradual onset. The patient had difficulty sleeping Thursday because of the
pain. The pain continued to gradually increase in severity to an 8/10 today. The pain was
exacerbated with walking or standing and was not significantly relieved with Percocet that the
patient had by prescription. The knee pain is unlike any prior episode of pain crisis. The patient
reports some chills and mild SOB, but denies fever, N/V, cough, chest pain, abdominal pain or
recent trauma to the knees. In the ED, the pain was primarily localized to the right knee and was
8/10 in intensity. The patient was started on NS at 125ml/hr and received two doses (6mg and
8mg) of morphine.
PMH
Medical/Surgical History:
1. Sickle cell disease: Last pain crisis was while living in ------------ over 1 year ago.
Followed by Dr. Ataga in Heme clinic at UNC.
2. Hospitalization at Wake Hospital in July for chest pain after being hit with basketball, but
subsequently developed increased difficulty in breathing and fevers requiring
hospitalization for approximately one week and received 3U PRBCs. Patient unclear
whether he had pneumonia or acute chest syndrome.
3. h/o of stuttering priapism
4. h/o lower extremity ulcers
Family History:
The patient has two siblings with sickle cell disease. No family h/o arthritis, heart disease, DM,
HTN, liver or kidney disease.
Social History:
Patient lives in ----------with mother and four siblings. Patient originally from ---------- but
moved to US about 1.5 years ago. Patient works at --------department store. The patient denies
tobacco or IV drug use, but reports occasional EtOH use with last time in August. No recent
travel or sick contacts.
Allergies: NKDA
Medications:
1. folic acid 5mg qd
2. Percocet (5/325mg) 1 tab q4-6hr PRN for pain
Review of Systems:
Constitutional: Intermittent chills with decreased appetite. No fevers, night sweats or weight
loss.
Eyes: No vision changes.
ENT: No URI symptoms, mouth ulcers or dysphagia.
Skin: Jaundice and scaly silver nonpruritic rash on right flexor surface of elbow.
Cardiovascular: Mild SOB. No chest pain, DOB or edema.
Pulmonary: No cough (dry or productive), colored sputum, or wheeze.
Endocrine: No polyuria, polydipsia, skin /hair changes, heat/cold intolerance.
GI: No N/V/C/D, BRBPR, GER, abd pain or bowel changes.
GU: No frequency, urgency, dysuria, or hematuria.
MSK: See HPI. Intermittent left hand pain.
Neurologic: No weakness or numbness.
Psychology: No depression, anxiety, or insomnia.
Heme/Lymph: Transfusion in July (3U PRBCs)
Physical Examination
VS: T: 36.3; HR: 96; RR: 16; BP: 108/70; O2sat: 89% RA (h/o upper 80s-low 90s)
General: Patient lying in bed in obvious discomfort but NAD. Thin appearance.
Eyes: PERRL, EOMI. Significant scleral icterus.
ENT: No nasal d/c. MMM. Oropharynx clear with no lesions/erythema.
Neck: Supple with no LAD or masses.
Lymph Nodes: No cervical or inguinal LAD.
Cardiovascular: RRR. Prominent heart sounds, S1 and S2 normal, no m/g/r. Pulses 2+ equal on
both sides.
Lungs: Diffusely decreased breath sounds bilateral. No crackles/rhonchi/wheezes. Good air
movement.
Skin: Silver scaly rash on flexor surface of right elbow.
Psychiatry: Alert and oriented to person, place, and time
Abdomen: Normoactive bowel sounds. Abdomen muscular and tense, NT, ND. Liver palpable
1-2 cm below costal margin. Difficult to palpate spleen due to rigidity of abdomen. No rebound
or guarding.
Extremeties: No bilateral cyanosis, clubbing or edema. No petechiae. Capillary refill <3 sec.
MSK: Right knee mild swelling and small effusion. No erythema. Not tender to palpation but
painful upon full extension of knee. Left knee exhibited no signficant swelling or tenderness.
Full ROM of knees bilaterally.
Neurological: Cranial nerves II-XII grossly intact, normal sensation throughout, normal
cerebellar function. DTR 2+ symmetrical.
Pertinent Diagnostic Tests
CBC pending. Chem10 WNL (see WebCIS).
Assessment and Plan
24 yo African-American man with h/o of sickle cell disease and hypoxia who presents to the ED
with bilateral knee pain and minor right knee effusion. DDx includes vasoocclusive disease
(VOD), periarticular infarct, septic arthritis gout.
KNEE PAIN/EFFUSION: Unclear etiology with DDx including VOD, periarticular infarct,
septic arthritis, or gout. VOD or periarticular infarct most likely given afebrile presentation.
Radiographs are usually of low yield and therefore not warranted. Consider NSAID treatment
with morphine for breakthrough pain. If patient spikes fever or CBC demonstrates marked
leukocytosis, will obtain blood cultures and begin empirical Abx treatment with coverage for
Staph and Salmonella.
SICKLE CELL DISEASE: Previously asymptomatic. Monitor closely for acute chest syndrome
(CXR pending), splenic sequestration or aplastic crisis.
HYPOXIA: Patient normal O2 sats are 80s-90s per Clinic note. Will obtain CXR to r/o new
infiltrates. Consider O2 treatment if patient becomes symptomatic.
DISPO: d/c tomorrow if pain improves.
Discussion
Sickle cell disease (SCD) is an autosomal recessive disorder that involves a point mutation in the
β-globin gene (Glu6Val). The mutation alters the structure of the hemoglobin molecule (HbS),
causing aggregation of hemoglobin under conditions of deoxygenation. Aggregation and
polymerization of HbS distorts erythrocyte structure into a “sickle” shape. Sickled cells have a
reduced lifespan, resulting in chronic hemolytic anemia. Sickled cells also have an increased
propensity to attach to the endothelium of postcapillary venules and cause vascular occlusion.
The vascular obstruction and resulting ischemia are responsible for the recurrent episodes of
acute pain that are characteristic of sickle cell disease. More life-threatening complications of
sickle cell disease include acute chest syndrome, splenic sequestration and aplastic anemia (1).
The severe knee pain in the patient is likely secondary a vasoocclusive event leading to
periarticular infarction. Microvascular occlusion most often occurs within bone marrow, but can
arise in practically any anatomical location. The pathophysiology involves the attachment of
sickle cells to endothelium, resulting in the formation of heterocellular aggregates composed of
sickle cells, leukocytes and platelets. Vascular occlusion by the heterocellular aggregates results
in infarction and the release of inflammatory mediators, which induce pain through activation of
nociceptive afferent nerve fibers (2). Management of painful vasoocclusive crises involves
hydration, warm packs on the affected areas, and a combination of opioid or nonopioid
analgesics and NSAIDs. Painful crises that result in a visit to the ER should be treated promptly
with high-dose morphine, as early pain management can decrease the likelihood of costly
hospitalization (3). For patients with recurrent vasooclusive events, treatment with hydroxurea
has been shown to decrease the rate of pain crises (4). Hydroxyurea has also been shown to
cause a modest decrease in mortality for patients with SCD (5).
The patient also presented with chronic hypoxia and dyspnea, which are frequent manifestations
of chronic lung disease associated with SCD. SCD is frequently associated with pulmonary
hyperreactivity, restrict lung disease and pulmonary hypertension (6). A recent study found that
approximately 90% adult patients with SCD exhibited abnormal PFT functions, including
decreased total lung capacities and diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide (7). Unfortunately,
pulmonary complications of SCD account for 20-30% of the mortality in patients (5). 
Investigational treatments for the pulmonary complications of SCD include inhalational nitric
oxide (NO) and its precursor oral L-arginine. NO induces pulmonary vasodilation, thus
alleviating pulmonary hypertension. NO also acts as inhibits expression of cell adhesion
molecules involved with binding of sickle cells to endothelium and decreases production of
proinflammatory mediators. While transgenic mouse models have suggested a beneficial role of
NO and L-arginine for pulmonary complications of SCD, clinical trials are currently lacking (2).
References
1. Hoffman, R. Hematology: basic principles and practice. 4th edition, pp. xxix, 2821 p.
Philadelphia, Pa.: Churchill Livingstone, 2005.
2. Stuart, M. J. and Nagel, R. L. Sickle-cell disease. Lancet, 364: 1343-1360, 2004.
3. Benjamin, L. J., Swinson, G. I., and Nagel, R. L. Sickle cell anemia day hospital: an
approach for the management of uncomplicated painful crises. Blood, 95: 1130-1136,
2000.
4. Charache, S., Terrin, M. L., Moore, R. D., Dover, G. J., Barton, F. B., Eckert, S. V.,
McMahon, R. P., and Bonds, D. R. Effect of hydroxyurea on the frequency of painful
crises in sickle cell anemia. Investigators of the Multicenter Study of Hydroxyurea in
Sickle Cell Anemia. N Engl J Med, 332: 1317-1322, 1995.
5. Steinberg, M. H., Barton, F., Castro, O., Pegelow, C. H., Ballas, S. K., Kutlar, A.,
Orringer, E., Bellevue, R., Olivieri, N., Eckman, J., Varma, M., Ramirez, G., Adler, B.,
Smith, W., Carlos, T., Ataga, K., DeCastro, L., Bigelow, C., Saunthararajah, Y., Telfer,
M., Vichinsky, E., Claster, S., Shurin, S., Bridges, K., Waclawiw, M., Bonds, D., and
Terrin, M. Effect of hydroxyurea on mortality and morbidity in adult sickle cell anemia:
risks and benefits up to 9 years of treatment. Jama, 289: 1645-1651, 2003.
6. Powars, D., Weidman, J. A., Odom-Maryon, T., Niland, J. C., and Johnson, C. Sickle cell
chronic lung disease: prior morbidity and the risk of pulmonary failure. Medicine
(Baltimore), 67: 66-76, 1988.
7. Klings, E. S., Wyszynski, D. F., Nolan, V. G., and Steinberg, M. H. Abnormal pulmonary
function in adults with sickle cell anemia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med, 173: 1264-1269,
2006.